rfc/classes.md, before:

Prev: [Grammar](grammar.md)   
Next: [Class Construction](class-construction.md)

---

# Section 4: Classes

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/classes.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/classes.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

# 4.1 Overview
Corinna classes are single-inheritance, data is declared with `field` (instance
data) or `my` (class data), and methods use the `method` keyword instead of
`sub`. All methods require signatures, even methods who take no arguments.

Methods are not subroutines. Corinna cannot call methods without an invocant
and cannot call subroutines with an invocant.

For the MVP, Corinna classes cannot inherit from non-Corinna classes. It
remains unclear in practice how problematic this will be. Using
`:handles` to explicitly delegate to methods you need will help. Remember that

# 4.2 Discussion
As per [the grammar](grammar.md), the smallest possible class is `class A
{}` and you could instantiate with `my $object = A->new`. Not very useful, but
it's there. Note that you do not need to specify a constructor.

Here's a somewhat more interesting class. `field` declares a field (data) and the
`/:\w+/` modifiers provide additional behavior. See
[modifiers](attributes.md) for more information.

```perl
class Person {
    field $name  :param;              # must be passed to constructor (:param)
    field $title :param { undef };    # optionally passed to constructor (:param, but with default)

    method name () {                  # instance method
        return defined $title ? "$title $name" : $name;
    }
}
```

And here's how you would use this class.

```perl
my $villain = Person->new( title => 'Dr.', name => 'Zachary Smith' );
my $boy     = Person->new( name => 'Will Robinson' );

say $villain->name;   # Dr. Zachary Smith
say $boy->name;       # Will Robinson
```

In the above, that the `$name` and `$title` fields are completely
encapsulated. If you want to expose them to the outside world, you would use
the `:reader` and `:writer` modifiers.

We have a `Person` class with a required name and an optional
title. The constructor is `new` and accepts an even-sized list of key/value
pairs. Per the [class construction specification](class-construction.md),
duplicate keys to the constructor are not allowed. Nor is a hash reference. If
you wish to provide an an alternate set of arguments to the constructor, write
an alternate constructor (the behavior replaces Moo/se `BUILDARGS`).

```perl
method from_name :common ($name) {    # ':common ' means it's a class method
    $class->new( name => $name );     # all methods have an immutable $class variable injected.
}
my $boy = Person->from_name('Will Robinson');
say $boy->name; # Will Robinson
```

Let's make the class more interesting.

```perl
class Person {
    use DateTime;
    field $name  :param;                               # must be passed to customer (:param)
    field $title :param          { undef };            # optionally passed to constructor (:param, but with default)
    field $created               { DateTime->now };    # cannot be passed to constructor (no :param)
    field $num_people :common    { 0 };                # class data, defaults to 0 (common, with hand-rolled reader method)
    method num_people :common () { $num_people }

    ADJUST   { $num_people++ }                         # called after new(), but before returned to consumer (BUILD)
    DESTRUCT { $num_people-- }                         # destructor

    method name () {
        return defined $title ? "$title $name" : $name;
    }
}
```

And using it.

```perl
say Person->num_people;     # 0
my $villain = Person->new( title => 'Dr.', name => 'Zachary Smith' );
say $villain->name;         # Dr. Zachary Smith
say Person->num_people;     # 1
say $villain->num_people;   # 1 class methods can be called on instances
                            # but instance methods can't be called from classnames or methods
my $boy = Person->new( name => 'Will Robinson' );
say $boy->name;             # Will Robinson
say Person->num_people;     # 2
undef $villain;
say Person->num_people;     # 1
undef $boy;
say Person->num_people;     # 0
```

`ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` are [phasers](phasers.md).

## 4.2.1 Versions
Just add the version number after the class name as a `:version(...)`
modifier. This should accept any standard version number.

```perl
class My::Class :version(3.14) {
    ...
}
```

## 4.2.2 Inheritance
Corinna supports single inheritance via the `:isa` modifier. You may
optionally add a version number to the name of the class you're inheriting
from to show the minimum allowed version of the class.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person 3.14) :version(v2.1.0) {
    field $customer_id :param;

    method name :overrides () {
        my $name = $self->next::method();
        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
        return $name;
    }
}
```

Usage:

```perl
say Customer->num_people; # 0 (inherited)
my $customer = Customer->new( name => 'Ford Prefect', customer_id => 42 );
say Customer->num_people; # 1
say $customer->name;      # Ford Prefect (#42)
```

Let's look at the method a bit more closely.

```
01:    method name :overrides () {
02:        my $name = $self->next::method();
03:        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
04:        return $name;
05:    }
```

On line 1, the `:overrides` tells Corinna we're overriding a parent method. This should:

* Suppress overridden warnings when overriding a parent method
* Generate a compile-time error if there is no parent method

The compile-time error is to prevent cases like the method above, where
`$self->next::method()` would ordinarily generate a runtime exception because
the method does not exist.

On line 2, we see two interesting things. First is the immutable `$self`
variable automatically injected into the body of the method. There is also a
`$class` variable availabe, but it's not shown in this example.

Next is the `next::method` part. Usually we see that as part of the C3 mro. It's here because of the
[SUPER-bug in Perl](http://modernperlbooks.com/mt/2009/09/when-super-isnt.html).

## 4.2.3 Roles
Corinna allows roles to be consumed via `does`. Here's a simple role.

```perl
role RoleStringify {
    method to_string() { return $self->name }
}
```

And a class consuming it.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person) :does(RoleStringify) {
    field $customer_id :param;

    method name :overrides () {
        my $name = $self->next::method();
        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
        return $name;
    }
}
```

Usage.

```perl
my $customer = Customer->new( name => 'Ford Prefect', customer_id => 42 );
say $customer->to_string();      # Ford Prefect (#42)
```

Multiple roles may be consumed.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person) :does(RoleStringify, RoleJSON) :version(v1.2.3) {
    ...
}
```

Role semantics will be covered more thoroughly in [roles](roles.md).

## 4.2.4 Abstract Classes
Abstract classes are classes which are designed to be subclassed and not
instantiated directly. They are declared by using an `:abstract` moddifier in
the definition:

```perl
class Employee :abstract {
    ...
}

class Employee::Manager :isa(Employee) {
    ...
}

class Employee::Hourly :isa(Employee) {
    ...
}
```

Attempting to instantiate an abstract class is a fatal error.

## 4.2.5 Subroutines versus Methods
In Corinna, methods and subs are not the same thing. Here's a silly example.

```perl
class Iterator::Number {
    use List::Util 'sum';
    field $i { 0 };
    field @numbers;   # only the `:common` modifier allowed on non-scalars

    method push ($num)    { push @numbers => $num    }
    method pop            { pop  @numbers            }
    method shift ()       { return shift @numbers    }
    method unshift ($num) { unshift @numbers => $num }
    method sum ()         { return sum(@numbers)     } # !!!
    method reset ()       { $i = 0                   }
    method exhausted ()   { return $i > $#numbers    }
    method next () {
        if ( not $self->exhausted ) {
            return $numbers[$i];
            $i++;
        }
    }
}
```

Usage.

```perl
my $iter = Iterator::Number->new;
$iter->push($_) for 1,2,3;
say $iter->sum; # 6
```

In Corinna, methods and subroutines are not the same thing. If we did _not_
have a `sum` method in the above code, attempting to call `$iter->sum` (or
`$self->sum` internally) would generate a 'method not found' error.


---

Prev: [Grammar](grammar.md)   
Next: [Class Construction](class-construction.md)

Commit message:

Make "attributes" the official name of the field modifiers

rfc/classes.md, after:

Prev: [Grammar](grammar.md)   
Next: [Class Construction](class-construction.md)

---

# Section 4: Classes

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/classes.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/classes.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

# 4.1 Overview
Corinna classes are single-inheritance, data is declared with `field` (instance
data) or `my` (class data), and methods use the `method` keyword instead of
`sub`. All methods require signatures, even methods who take no arguments.

Methods are not subroutines. Corinna cannot call methods without an invocant
and cannot call subroutines with an invocant.

For the MVP, Corinna classes cannot inherit from non-Corinna classes. It
remains unclear in practice how problematic this will be. Using
`:handles` to explicitly delegate to methods you need will help. Remember that

# 4.2 Discussion
As per [the grammar](grammar.md), the smallest possible class is `class A
{}` and you could instantiate with `my $object = A->new`. Not very useful, but
it's there. Note that you do not need to specify a constructor.

Here's a somewhat more interesting class. `field` declares a field (data) and the
`/:\w+/` attributes provide additional behavior. See
[Fields](attributes.md) for more information.

```perl
class Person {
    field $name  :param;              # must be passed to constructor (:param)
    field $title :param { undef };    # optionally passed to constructor (:param, but with default)

    method name () {                  # instance method
        return defined $title ? "$title $name" : $name;
    }
}
```

And here's how you would use this class.

```perl
my $villain = Person->new( title => 'Dr.', name => 'Zachary Smith' );
my $boy     = Person->new( name => 'Will Robinson' );

say $villain->name;   # Dr. Zachary Smith
say $boy->name;       # Will Robinson
```

In the above, that the `$name` and `$title` fields are completely
encapsulated. If you want to expose them to the outside world, you would use
the `:reader` and `:writer` attributes.

We have a `Person` class with a required name and an optional
title. The constructor is `new` and accepts an even-sized list of key/value
pairs. Per the [class construction specification](class-construction.md),
duplicate keys to the constructor are not allowed. Nor is a hash reference. If
you wish to provide an an alternate set of arguments to the constructor, write
an alternate constructor (the behavior replaces Moo/se `BUILDARGS`).

```perl
method from_name :common ($name) {    # ':common ' means it's a class method
    $class->new( name => $name );     # all methods have an immutable $class variable injected.
}
my $boy = Person->from_name('Will Robinson');
say $boy->name; # Will Robinson
```

Let's make the class more interesting.

```perl
class Person {
    use DateTime;
    field $name  :param;                               # must be passed to customer (:param)
    field $title :param          { undef };            # optionally passed to constructor (:param, but with default)
    field $created               { DateTime->now };    # cannot be passed to constructor (no :param)
    field $num_people :common    { 0 };                # class data, defaults to 0 (common, with hand-rolled reader method)
    method num_people :common () { $num_people }

    ADJUST   { $num_people++ }                         # called after new(), but before returned to consumer (BUILD)
    DESTRUCT { $num_people-- }                         # destructor

    method name () {
        return defined $title ? "$title $name" : $name;
    }
}
```

And using it.

```perl
say Person->num_people;     # 0
my $villain = Person->new( title => 'Dr.', name => 'Zachary Smith' );
say $villain->name;         # Dr. Zachary Smith
say Person->num_people;     # 1
say $villain->num_people;   # 1 class methods can be called on instances
                            # but instance methods can't be called from classnames or methods
my $boy = Person->new( name => 'Will Robinson' );
say $boy->name;             # Will Robinson
say Person->num_people;     # 2
undef $villain;
say Person->num_people;     # 1
undef $boy;
say Person->num_people;     # 0
```

`ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` are [phasers](phasers.md).

## 4.2.1 Versions
Just add the version number after the class name as a `:version(...)`
attribute. This should accept any standard version number.

```perl
class My::Class :version(3.14) {
    ...
}
```

## 4.2.2 Inheritance
Corinna supports single inheritance via the `:isa` attribute. You may
optionally add a version number to the name of the class you're inheriting
from to show the minimum allowed version of the class.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person 3.14) :version(v2.1.0) {
    field $customer_id :param;

    method name :overrides () {
        my $name = $self->next::method();
        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
        return $name;
    }
}
```

Usage:

```perl
say Customer->num_people; # 0 (inherited)
my $customer = Customer->new( name => 'Ford Prefect', customer_id => 42 );
say Customer->num_people; # 1
say $customer->name;      # Ford Prefect (#42)
```

Let's look at the method a bit more closely.

```
01:    method name :overrides () {
02:        my $name = $self->next::method();
03:        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
04:        return $name;
05:    }
```

On line 1, the `:overrides` tells Corinna we're overriding a parent method. This should:

* Suppress overridden warnings when overriding a parent method
* Generate a compile-time error if there is no parent method

The compile-time error is to prevent cases like the method above, where
`$self->next::method()` would ordinarily generate a runtime exception because
the method does not exist.

On line 2, we see two interesting things. First is the immutable `$self`
variable automatically injected into the body of the method. There is also a
`$class` variable availabe, but it's not shown in this example.

Next is the `next::method` part. Usually we see that as part of the C3 mro. It's here because of the
[SUPER-bug in Perl](http://modernperlbooks.com/mt/2009/09/when-super-isnt.html).

## 4.2.3 Roles
Corinna allows roles to be consumed via `does`. Here's a simple role.

```perl
role RoleStringify {
    method to_string() { return $self->name }
}
```

And a class consuming it.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person) :does(RoleStringify) {
    field $customer_id :param;

    method name :overrides () {
        my $name = $self->next::method();
        $name .= " (#$customer_id)";
        return $name;
    }
}
```

Usage.

```perl
my $customer = Customer->new( name => 'Ford Prefect', customer_id => 42 );
say $customer->to_string();      # Ford Prefect (#42)
```

Multiple roles may be consumed.

```perl
class Customer :isa(Person) :does(RoleStringify, RoleJSON) :version(v1.2.3) {
    ...
}
```

Role semantics will be covered more thoroughly in [roles](roles.md).

## 4.2.4 Abstract Classes
Abstract classes are classes which are designed to be subclassed and not
instantiated directly. They are declared by using an `:abstract` moddifier in
the definition:

```perl
class Employee :abstract {
    ...
}

class Employee::Manager :isa(Employee) {
    ...
}

class Employee::Hourly :isa(Employee) {
    ...
}
```

Attempting to instantiate an abstract class is a fatal error.

## 4.2.5 Subroutines versus Methods
In Corinna, methods and subs are not the same thing. Here's a silly example.

```perl
class Iterator::Number {
    use List::Util 'sum';
    field $i { 0 };
    field @numbers;   # only the `:common` attribute allowed on non-scalars

    method push ($num)    { push @numbers => $num    }
    method pop            { pop  @numbers            }
    method shift ()       { return shift @numbers    }
    method unshift ($num) { unshift @numbers => $num }
    method sum ()         { return sum(@numbers)     } # !!!
    method reset ()       { $i = 0                   }
    method exhausted ()   { return $i > $#numbers    }
    method next () {
        if ( not $self->exhausted ) {
            return $numbers[$i];
            $i++;
        }
    }
}
```

Usage.

```perl
my $iter = Iterator::Number->new;
$iter->push($_) for 1,2,3;
say $iter->sum; # 6
```

In Corinna, methods and subroutines are not the same thing. If we did _not_
have a `sum` method in the above code, attempting to call `$iter->sum` (or
`$self->sum` internally) would generate a 'method not found' error.


---

Prev: [Grammar](grammar.md)   
Next: [Class Construction](class-construction.md)
