Prev: [Quotes](quotes.md)   
Next: [README](/README.md)

---

# Section 13: Changes

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/major-changes.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/major-changes.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

Due to the fast-moving nature of this project, we won't note every little
change to the RFC. You can always clone the repo and read the commits.
Instead, we'll cover major changes here.

# Change Log

# August 17, 2022

- `field` attributes are now formally known as `modifiers`. The grammar and
  RFCs have been updated to reflect this.

# December 8, 2021

- Injected `$class` and `$self` variables are now documented as being
  immutable. That prevents this bug:

```perl
method foo () {
    $self = 42;
}
```

- Class data and methods are agreed to be declared with `:common`


```perl
field $foo :common;              # class data
method bar :common () { ... }    # class method
```

- Class data (declared with `:common` can accept defaults (see the next
  change) and only allows the `:reader` attribute with it.

- Field initialization no longer allows `=`.  You must wrap the default in
  curly braces (an anonymous sub). This is because of this problem:

```perl
field $colors = [qw/blue white red/];
```

Every `$color` would get a reference to the same anonymous array. Instead, write
it like this:

```perl
field $colors { [qw/blue white red/] };
```

With that, you can change the colors of a particular instance without changing
the others. Yes, you could do `$foo = [qw/blue white black/]'` in a method,
but if someone did `$foo->[-1] = 'black';`, they might wonder why all other
instances had their value changed.

We realize this change might seem strange, but we're hopeful people will get
used to it.

As of this writing, we do not plan to inject `$class` or `$self` into that
block. That avoids this bug:

```perl
field $color { $self->get_colors };
```

Because initialization happens when the instance construction might not be
complete, some fields may not be properly defined, leading to obscure bugs.

# December 6, 2021

- After considerable discussion, `slot` has been renamed to `field`. A few
  people objected to "slot" because it's an unusual term (borrowed from Lisp).
  Some non-native English speakers pointed out that "slot" is also harder for
  them to understand, while "field" is very clear. There was discussion about
  confusion with the little-used "fields" pragma, but it was generally agreed
  this would be unlikely.

# December 4, 2021

- We have removed the special `:handles(*)` syntax. It was proving too
  problematic and, in fact, would not have allowed us to simulate inheritance
  because once you enter the delegate, you can't override its methods because
  it's not in your inheritance hierarchy.

# November 23, 2021

- Clarify that the `:handles(*)` delegation will not auto-delegate to methods
  beginning with underscores to avoid those becoming part of the public
  interface. Of course, internally you can still call those methods directly
  on the slot variable calling the object.

# November 15, 2021

- After many suggestions from Paul Evans and later by Damian Conway, Corinna
  has been switched over to
  [KIM](https://ovid.github.io/articles/language-design-consistency.html)
  (Keyword, Identifier, Modifier) syntax. See also [Damian Conway's post on
  the
  topic](http://blogs.perl.org/users/damian_conway/2021/11/a-dream-resyntaxed.html).

# November 2, 2021

- Method modifiers RFC section added.
- Classes documentation now shows we use any legal version numbers, not just
  semver triples.

## September 22, 2021

- Abtract methods in classes and required methods in roles are no longer
  allowed to declare their argument lists. This gives us room to reconsider
  this behavior post-MVP.

## September 21, 2021

- `:name` attribute for slots removed from MVP. Might be returned later.
- Version numbers no longer limited to semver. All current Perl version
  formats intended to be supported.
- Classes which both inherit and consume roles must now declare the parent
  before the roles (previously, the order was not relevant).
- Method access levels such as `common`, `private`, and `overrides` are now
  attributes that come between the method name and the argument list:

```perl
method foo :overrides ($bar, $baz) { ... }
```

## August 26, 2021

- Class slots now declared with `my`. They do not take attributes.

## August 19, 2021

- Slot declaration keyword renamed from `has` to `slot`

## August 14, 2021

- First draft of RFC released as markdown in github repo so that pull requests
  can be received. Wiki is noted to primarily be of historical interest.


---

Prev: [Quotes](quotes.md)   
Next: [README](/README.md)
