rfc/overview.md, before:

Prev: [Table of Contents](toc.md)   
Next: [Grammar](grammar.md)

---

# Section 2: Overview

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/overview.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/overview.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

Pursuant to [the new RFC process Perl is experimenting with](https://github.com/Perl/RFCs), we will create an RFC for Corinna.

This is an incomplete WIP that will be worked on as we have time. It is VERY alpha.

---

# 2.1 Preamble
    Author:  Curtis "Ovid" Poe <curtis.poe@gmail.com>
    Sponsor: Paul "LeoNerd" Evans
    ID:      OVID
    Status:  Proposal
    Title:   Corinna—Bring Effective Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) to the Perl core

# 2.2 Abstract
It's time to bring effective OOP to the Perl core, but we still plan to keep Perl being Perl.

# 2.3 Motivation
I'm going to be blunt, and then I'll move on.

> Inside the echo chamber: "It's so easy to do X in Perl that there's no need to add X to core."
> 
> Outside the echo chamber: "Perl's missing many features that modern languages need."

The above points of view are not attracting people to the Perl language. I
believe we're losing more developers than we gain. It's time to turn that
around.

Moving along ...

Depending on what you call an OOP system, the CPAN appears to have 80+
contenders. It's a bewildering array of buggy, half-implemented systems. Even
the best of them have limitations, largely imposed by the Perl language
itself. If you've not already done so, I strongly recommend reading [The Lisp
Curse](http://winestockwebdesign.com/Essays/Lisp_Curse.html). That explains
our mess in spades.

We're trying to solve the ever-present problem with "what OOP system do I
use?" coupled with "Perl looks ancient."

Existing syntax is hurting Perl, not helping it. While we don't propose
changing or removing `bless`, it's the "assembly language of OO." It allows
you to build powerful things on top of it, but everyone who does is spending
time repeating lots of boilerplate code, rewriting the same bugs, and
implementing different OO systems with different semantics, making it harder
for a developer to learn the quirks.

Of the existing CPAN modules, Moo/se seems to have won, but they have numerous
issues, partly due to limitations imposed by the Perl language itself.

# 2.4 Rationale
The syntax of Corinna is clear, concise, and makes it easier to write safe
code, along with avoiding some of the mistakes inherent in Moo/se. Further, by
having a clear set of semantics up front, once developers "learn" Corinna
syntax, it's the same everywhere. Java was designed to be portable across
architectures. Corinna is designed to be portable across developers.

But why not another system? As we understand it, Moose has already been
rejected because it would pull in a large number of modules into the Perl core
and P5P does not wish to maintain them.

Moo is faster and smaller, but thanks to how the `meta` method works, it's
easy to try metaprogramming and get your Moo class inflated to Moose. Thus,
including Moo in the core would force us to either include Moose or to break
backwards compatibility.

Further, Moo/se:

* Uses blessed hashrefs and this doesn't encapsulate/isolate your data
* The attributes make it hard to _not_ expose them to consumers (including
  subclasses), making it more difficult to minimize your contract
* It's natural to write mutable objects in Moo/se, creating reference
  structures with strange action at a distance
* Moo/se _encourages_ creating "builders" which allow [subclasses to override
  parent class data which should be
  private](https://ovid.github.io/articles/the-problem-with-builder.html)
* Due to legacy code, we have to allow both hashrefs and key value pairs in
  constructors, unnecessarily complicating the implementation and breaking
  poorly-implemented `BUILDARGS`.

There's more which can be said, but the Moo/se issues have taught us a huge
amount about what we would like in OO, but come with considerable baggage. I'm
sure we can easily troll through the innumerable alternatives on the CPAN and
find similar issues.

Stevan Little's [Moxie](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moxie) is of great interest,
but the syntax is unfortunate and it's still tied to Perl's limitations.

# 2.5 Specification
The specification would be daunting for the RFC. It's largely based on [our
MVP description](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Corinna-Overview) and the
[Object::Pad](https://metacpan.org/pod/Object::Pad) test suite.

That being said, it's much smaller than it looks. In fact, Corinna only
creates four new keywords to support everything:

* `class`
* `role`
* `field`
* `method`

To get the full power of modern OO, we leverage attributes to modify those
keywords: `field $customer_name :reader;`

None of the keywords are exposed outside the context of a class, helping to
further ensure the backwards-compatibility of our proposal.

# 2.6 Backwards Compatibility
## 2.6.1 Syntax
Currently, Corinna's syntax is almost entirely backwards-compatible because
the code does not parse on older Perls that `use strict`. This is helped
tremendously by requiring a postfix block syntax which encapsulates the
changes, rather than the standard `class Foo :is(Bar); field ...` syntax.

```
$ perl -Mstrict -Mwarnings -E 'class Foo { field $x; }'
Global symbol "$x" requires explicit package name (did you forget to declare "my $x"?) at -e line 1.
syntax error at -e line 1, near "; }"
Execution of -e aborted due to compilation errors.
```

Various incantations all cause the same failures. If `strict` is not used, you
will get runtime failures with strange error messages due to indirect object
syntax:

```
$ perl -e 'class Foo { field $x }'
Can't call method "field" on an undefined value at -e line 1.
```

In an unlikely case, if your older code uses `strict` but you have an empty
class or role body, you will also get errors due to indirect object syntax
because Perl will think the block delimiters, `{ ... }` are a hashref and not
a block.

In an edge case, if have `class Foo { ... }` and you _already_ have a class by
that name defined (and loaded) elsewhere, then Perl will try an indirect
object method call and that might succeed, leading to strange errors:

```perl
package Foo {
    sub class { print "darn it\n" }
};

class Foo {}  # prints "darn it"
```

Note that we also intend for the block to have strict and warnings, along with
disabling indirect method calls. Because those pragmas are file scoped without
a block, requiring a block limits the damage, so to speak.

## 2.6.2 Tooling
As for tooling, we hope that
[`B::Deparse`](https://metacpan.org/pod/B::Deparse),
[`Devel::Cover`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Cover), and
[`Devel::NYTProf`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::NYTProf), won't be impacted
too strongly. However, this has not yet been tested.

[`PPI`](https://metacpan.org/pod/PPI) (and thus
[`Perl::Critic`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Perl::Critic) and friends) will be
impacted, but we have defined a regular grammar for Corinna, making parsing
much easier.

The maintainer of [Data::Printer](https://metacpan.org/pod/Data::Printer) has
already willingness to help with showing Corinna object internals for
debugging.

Paul "LeoNerd" Evans intends to release `Feature::Compat::Class` along the
same lines as
[`Feature::Compat::Try`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Feature::Compat::Try). That
would allow Corinna to be accessible to Perls as old as v5.18.0 (the earliest
Perl version that supports Object::Pad).

## 2.6.3 Feature Guard
For newer Perl's, Corinna is not intended to be available by default. Instead,
it will start with a feature guard:

```perl
use feature 'class';

class Customer :isa(Person) {
    ...
}
```

Later, it will likely be automatically available with `use v8;` (speculating
about the version number).

# 2.7 Security Implications
Most of what we plan leverages Perl's current capabilities, but with a
different grammar. We don't anticipate particular security issues. In fact,
due to increased encapsulation, Corinna might actually be a bit more secure
(in terms of data it exposes).

# 2.8 Examples
Here is an LRU cache demonstrating many of the features of Corinna (but not
roles):

```perl
use feature 'class';

class Cache::LRU :version(v0.1.0) {
    use Hash::Ordered;
    use Carp 'croak';

    field $num_caches :common                 { 0 };
    field $cache      :handles(exists delete) { Hash::Ordered->new };
    field $max_size   :param  :reader         { 20 };
    field $created    :reader                 { time };

    ADJUST { # called after new()
        $num_caches++;
        if ( $max_size < 1 ) {
            croak(...);
        }
    }
    DESTRUCT { $num_caches-- }

    method num_caches :common () { $num_caches }

    method set ( $key, $value ) {
        if ( $self->exists($key) ) {
            $self->delete($key);
        }
        elsif ( $cache->keys > $max_size ) {
            $cache->shift;
        }
        $cache->set( $key, $value );  # new values in front
    }

    method get($key) {
        if ( $self->exists($key) ) {
            my $value = $cache->get($key);
            $self->set( $key, $value );  # put it at the front
            return $value;
        }
        return;
    }
}
```

# 2.9 Prototype Implementation
Paul "LeoNerd" Evans has been using
[Object::Pad](https://metacpan.org/pod/Object::Pad) as a test bed for many of
these ideas, though he's included many things we don't intend for V1. However,
Object::Pad is stable and powerful enough that at least [one company is using
it in production](https://metacpan.org/pod/Myriad). [Here's a great discussion
of what they
discovered](https://www.reddit.com/r/perl/comments/nyuid5/were_starting_the_rfc_for_bringing_modern_oo_to/h1plagk/).

# 2.10 Benefits of this approach
## 2.10.1 Compile-time failures
In Moo/se and alternatives, calling `$self->{feild}` is often a silent failure
leading to mysterious bugs. Calling `$self->feild` is a runtime failure. In
Corinna, accessing an non-existent `$feild` is a compile-time failure:

```perl
field $field;

method foo () {
    say $feild; # compile-time failure, baby!
}
```

## 2.10.2 Encapsulation
No more getting a 3AM phone call because a batch job failed due to some dev
writing `$object->{sekret}->do_stuff`. In Corinna, class and instance data is
_fully_ encapsulated unless you choose to explicitly make it public.

## 2.10.3 Less Code
Every code example I've written in Corinna is much smaller than raw Perl or
even Moo/se. The production company above mentioned that their classes appear
to be 10% smaller with Object::Pad.

Because Corinna is largely declarative and requires writing less code, almost
by definition, you write fewer bugs. And that makes it easier to understand,
too.

## 2.10.4 Cleaner Interfaces
In Moo/se, it's hard to create attributes in such a way that you don't
publicly expose them in some way. This means that they become part of your
contract and if you need to change them later, too bad. In Corinna, we expose
_no_ attributes by default. You have to explicitly do that. This is because,
unlike Moo/se's `has`, the `field` in Corinna declares the field and nothing
else.

## 2.10.5 No MRO Pain
Due to single inheritance, MRO complications go away. Paul Evans has already
reported that it's easier to implement with single inheritance and this
implies there will be fewer bugs.

# 2.11 FAQ
## 2.11.1 Why not Moo/se or alternatives in the core?
The MVP for Corinna is designed to be the smallest possible _useful_ OOP that
we can get into the Perl core. We don't want to do too much in the MVP, lest
we get tied down with bad design decisions we can't easily walk back. The best
alternatives we see now are very feature complete and thus might violate the
idea of "minimum" viable concept.

P5P has (as we understand it) already rejected Moose in the core due to its
huge non-core dependency list. Moo in the core would have to break
backwards-compatibility with the `meta` method, leading to potential wide
scale breakage of the darkpan.

Further, even with [Moxie](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moxie), we find that the
implementation is limited by the syntax of the Perl language itself. There are
no true methods. It's tied to a blessed hashref, making it easy to violate
encapsulation (and this is needed because without public readers/writers, the
instance needs to reach into the hashref to get its data). The syntax is still
a bit clumsy, requiring readers/writers to be declared separately from their
fields.

We actually find [Zydeco](https://metacpan.org/pod/Zydeco) and
[Dios](https://metacpan.org/pod/Dios) interesting, but the scope of those
projects is probably far larger than what could go into the core (and we
haven't reviewed them thoroughly enough to sure they're appropriate).

# 2.12 Open Issues
The astute reader will note that between this and the
[Overview](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Corinna-Overview) (MVP) document,
there are a few things that are not specified. For example, while we have an
[extremely detailed specification for object
construction](https://gist.github.com/Ovid/accb0c7c8444bdd150b5c7509809477f),
we have not defined objects, classes, or methods. Some terms are so common
that repeating definitions everywhere would take months.

Other things, such as the exact nature of the destruction object that
`DESTRUCT` takes, or whether or not `DESTRUCT` is even a phaser. We're torn on
this.

We want the specification to be detailed enough that P5P can make a decision,
but want it to be loose enough that if we need to change some aspects, we
don't want P5P to feel like we've pulled a bait and switch.

So we're hoping to get approval for an iterative, agile approach. With the
great feedback from so many people, we've gotten most of those beaten into a
solid shape and we're comfortable with it, but no matter how careful we are,
we're going to make mistakes and we don't want to go down the waterfall
approach of specifying everything to the nth degree and committing ourselves
to a bad design.

# 2.13 Scope for future work
Corinna v.0.1.0 is intended to be "the simplest thing that can possibly work."
By "possibly work," we mean "is useful enough for a production environment."
However, it the list of things we _could_ add to Corinna is extensive and
should likely be guided by the new RFC process after the initial exposure to
Corinna gives people an idea of how effective OO can be.

There are numerous things we could do in the future.

* Create a native Object type (OV?) instead of using a blessed array reference
  (performance)
* Ability to declare individual classes and methods as `final` (performance.
  See also, [sealed
  lexicals](https://www.sunstarsys.com/essays/perl7-sealed-lexicals))
* Types (focused on correctness and readability, but this is a cross-cutting
  concern)
* Declare Authority (`class Foo authority cpan:OVID { ... }`)
* Nested classes
* Anonymous classes
* Multidispatch
* Etc.

# 2.14 Contributors
The [list of contributors is on the
wiki](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Contributors).

# 2.15 Copyright
Copyright (C) 2021, Curtis "Ovid" Poe

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed
and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.


---

Prev: [Table of Contents](toc.md)   
Next: [Grammar](grammar.md)

Commit message:

Rename Corinna field "attributes" to "modifiers".

rfc/overview.md, after:

Prev: [Table of Contents](toc.md)   
Next: [Grammar](grammar.md)

---

# Section 2: Overview

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/overview.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/overview.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

Pursuant to [the new RFC process Perl is experimenting with](https://github.com/Perl/RFCs), we will create an RFC for Corinna.

This is an incomplete WIP that will be worked on as we have time. It is VERY alpha.

---

# 2.1 Preamble
    Author:  Curtis "Ovid" Poe <curtis.poe@gmail.com>
    Sponsor: Paul "LeoNerd" Evans
    ID:      OVID
    Status:  Proposal
    Title:   Corinna—Bring Effective Object-Oriented Programming (OOP) to the Perl core

# 2.2 Abstract
It's time to bring effective OOP to the Perl core, but we still plan to keep Perl being Perl.

# 2.3 Motivation
I'm going to be blunt, and then I'll move on.

> Inside the echo chamber: "It's so easy to do X in Perl that there's no need to add X to core."
> 
> Outside the echo chamber: "Perl's missing many features that modern languages need."

The above points of view are not attracting people to the Perl language. I
believe we're losing more developers than we gain. It's time to turn that
around.

Moving along ...

Depending on what you call an OOP system, the CPAN appears to have 80+
contenders. It's a bewildering array of buggy, half-implemented systems. Even
the best of them have limitations, largely imposed by the Perl language
itself. If you've not already done so, I strongly recommend reading [The Lisp
Curse](http://winestockwebdesign.com/Essays/Lisp_Curse.html). That explains
our mess in spades.

We're trying to solve the ever-present problem with "what OOP system do I
use?" coupled with "Perl looks ancient."

Existing syntax is hurting Perl, not helping it. While we don't propose
changing or removing `bless`, it's the "assembly language of OO." It allows
you to build powerful things on top of it, but everyone who does is spending
time repeating lots of boilerplate code, rewriting the same bugs, and
implementing different OO systems with different semantics, making it harder
for a developer to learn the quirks.

Of the existing CPAN modules, Moo/se seems to have won, but they have numerous
issues, partly due to limitations imposed by the Perl language itself.

# 2.4 Rationale
The syntax of Corinna is clear, concise, and makes it easier to write safe
code, along with avoiding some of the mistakes inherent in Moo/se. Further, by
having a clear set of semantics up front, once developers "learn" Corinna
syntax, it's the same everywhere. Java was designed to be portable across
architectures. Corinna is designed to be portable across developers.

But why not another system? As we understand it, Moose has already been
rejected because it would pull in a large number of modules into the Perl core
and P5P does not wish to maintain them.

Moo is faster and smaller, but thanks to how the `meta` method works, it's
easy to try metaprogramming and get your Moo class inflated to Moose. Thus,
including Moo in the core would force us to either include Moose or to break
backwards compatibility.

Further, Moo/se:

* Uses blessed hashrefs and this doesn't encapsulate/isolate your data
* The attributes make it hard to _not_ expose them to consumers (including
  subclasses), making it more difficult to minimize your contract
* It's natural to write mutable objects in Moo/se, creating reference
  structures with strange action at a distance
* Moo/se _encourages_ creating "builders" which allow [subclasses to override
  parent class data which should be
  private](https://ovid.github.io/articles/the-problem-with-builder.html)
* Due to legacy code, we have to allow both hashrefs and key value pairs in
  constructors, unnecessarily complicating the implementation and breaking
  poorly-implemented `BUILDARGS`.

There's more which can be said, but the Moo/se issues have taught us a huge
amount about what we would like in OO, but come with considerable baggage. I'm
sure we can easily troll through the innumerable alternatives on the CPAN and
find similar issues.

Stevan Little's [Moxie](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moxie) is of great interest,
but the syntax is unfortunate and it's still tied to Perl's limitations.

# 2.5 Specification
The specification would be daunting for the RFC. It's largely based on [our
MVP description](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Corinna-Overview) and the
[Object::Pad](https://metacpan.org/pod/Object::Pad) test suite.

That being said, it's much smaller than it looks. In fact, Corinna only
creates four new keywords to support everything:

* `class`
* `role`
* `field`
* `method`

To get the full power of modern OO, we leverage modifiers to modify those
keywords: `field $customer_name :reader;`

None of the keywords are exposed outside the context of a class, helping to
further ensure the backwards-compatibility of our proposal.

# 2.6 Backwards Compatibility
## 2.6.1 Syntax
Currently, Corinna's syntax is almost entirely backwards-compatible because
the code does not parse on older Perls that `use strict`. This is helped
tremendously by requiring a postfix block syntax which encapsulates the
changes, rather than the standard `class Foo :is(Bar); field ...` syntax.

```
$ perl -Mstrict -Mwarnings -E 'class Foo { field $x; }'
Global symbol "$x" requires explicit package name (did you forget to declare "my $x"?) at -e line 1.
syntax error at -e line 1, near "; }"
Execution of -e aborted due to compilation errors.
```

Various incantations all cause the same failures. If `strict` is not used, you
will get runtime failures with strange error messages due to indirect object
syntax:

```
$ perl -e 'class Foo { field $x }'
Can't call method "field" on an undefined value at -e line 1.
```

In an unlikely case, if your older code uses `strict` but you have an empty
class or role body, you will also get errors due to indirect object syntax
because Perl will think the block delimiters, `{ ... }` are a hashref and not
a block.

In an edge case, if have `class Foo { ... }` and you _already_ have a class by
that name defined (and loaded) elsewhere, then Perl will try an indirect
object method call and that might succeed, leading to strange errors:

```perl
package Foo {
    sub class { print "darn it\n" }
};

class Foo {}  # prints "darn it"
```

Note that we also intend for the block to have strict and warnings, along with
disabling indirect method calls. Because those pragmas are file scoped without
a block, requiring a block limits the damage, so to speak.

## 2.6.2 Tooling
As for tooling, we hope that
[`B::Deparse`](https://metacpan.org/pod/B::Deparse),
[`Devel::Cover`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::Cover), and
[`Devel::NYTProf`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Devel::NYTProf), won't be impacted
too strongly. However, this has not yet been tested.

[`PPI`](https://metacpan.org/pod/PPI) (and thus
[`Perl::Critic`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Perl::Critic) and friends) will be
impacted, but we have defined a regular grammar for Corinna, making parsing
much easier.

The maintainer of [Data::Printer](https://metacpan.org/pod/Data::Printer) has
already willingness to help with showing Corinna object internals for
debugging.

Paul "LeoNerd" Evans intends to release `Feature::Compat::Class` along the
same lines as
[`Feature::Compat::Try`](https://metacpan.org/pod/Feature::Compat::Try). That
would allow Corinna to be accessible to Perls as old as v5.18.0 (the earliest
Perl version that supports Object::Pad).

## 2.6.3 Feature Guard
For newer Perl's, Corinna is not intended to be available by default. Instead,
it will start with a feature guard:

```perl
use feature 'class';

class Customer :isa(Person) {
    ...
}
```

Later, it will likely be automatically available with `use v8;` (speculating
about the version number).

# 2.7 Security Implications
Most of what we plan leverages Perl's current capabilities, but with a
different grammar. We don't anticipate particular security issues. In fact,
due to increased encapsulation, Corinna might actually be a bit more secure
(in terms of data it exposes).

# 2.8 Examples
Here is an LRU cache demonstrating many of the features of Corinna (but not
roles):

```perl
use feature 'class';

class Cache::LRU :version(v0.1.0) {
    use Hash::Ordered;
    use Carp 'croak';

    field $num_caches :common                 { 0 };
    field $cache      :handles(exists delete) { Hash::Ordered->new };
    field $max_size   :param  :reader         { 20 };
    field $created    :reader                 { time };

    ADJUST { # called after new()
        $num_caches++;
        if ( $max_size < 1 ) {
            croak(...);
        }
    }
    DESTRUCT { $num_caches-- }

    method num_caches :common () { $num_caches }

    method set ( $key, $value ) {
        if ( $self->exists($key) ) {
            $self->delete($key);
        }
        elsif ( $cache->keys > $max_size ) {
            $cache->shift;
        }
        $cache->set( $key, $value );  # new values in front
    }

    method get($key) {
        if ( $self->exists($key) ) {
            my $value = $cache->get($key);
            $self->set( $key, $value );  # put it at the front
            return $value;
        }
        return;
    }
}
```

# 2.9 Prototype Implementation
Paul "LeoNerd" Evans has been using
[Object::Pad](https://metacpan.org/pod/Object::Pad) as a test bed for many of
these ideas, though he's included many things we don't intend for V1. However,
Object::Pad is stable and powerful enough that at least [one company is using
it in production](https://metacpan.org/pod/Myriad). [Here's a great discussion
of what they
discovered](https://www.reddit.com/r/perl/comments/nyuid5/were_starting_the_rfc_for_bringing_modern_oo_to/h1plagk/).

# 2.10 Benefits of this approach
## 2.10.1 Compile-time failures
In Moo/se and alternatives, calling `$self->{feild}` is often a silent failure
leading to mysterious bugs. Calling `$self->feild` is a runtime failure. In
Corinna, accessing an non-existent `$feild` is a compile-time failure:

```perl
field $field;

method foo () {
    say $feild; # compile-time failure, baby!
}
```

## 2.10.2 Encapsulation
No more getting a 3AM phone call because a batch job failed due to some dev
writing `$object->{sekret}->do_stuff`. In Corinna, class and instance data is
_fully_ encapsulated unless you choose to explicitly make it public.

## 2.10.3 Less Code
Every code example I've written in Corinna is much smaller than raw Perl or
even Moo/se. The production company above mentioned that their classes appear
to be 10% smaller with Object::Pad.

Because Corinna is largely declarative and requires writing less code, almost
by definition, you write fewer bugs. And that makes it easier to understand,
too.

## 2.10.4 Cleaner Interfaces
In Moo/se, it's hard to create attributes in such a way that you don't
publicly expose them in some way. This means that they become part of your
contract and if you need to change them later, too bad. In Corinna, we expose
_no_ fields by default (note: "fields" in Corinna are analogous to
"attributes" in Moo/se). You have to explicitly expose them. This is because,
unlike Moo/se's `has`, the `field` in Corinna declares the field and nothing
else.

## 2.10.5 No MRO Pain
Due to single inheritance, MRO complications go away. Paul Evans has already
reported that it's easier to implement with single inheritance and this
implies there will be fewer bugs.

# 2.11 FAQ
## 2.11.1 Why not Moo/se or alternatives in the core?
The MVP for Corinna is designed to be the smallest possible _useful_ OOP that
we can get into the Perl core. We don't want to do too much in the MVP, lest
we get tied down with bad design decisions we can't easily walk back. The best
alternatives we see now are very feature complete and thus might violate the
idea of "minimum" viable concept.

P5P has (as we understand it) already rejected Moose in the core due to its
huge non-core dependency list. Moo in the core would have to break
backwards-compatibility with the `meta` method, leading to potential wide
scale breakage of the darkpan.

Further, even with [Moxie](https://metacpan.org/pod/Moxie), we find that the
implementation is limited by the syntax of the Perl language itself. There are
no true methods. It's tied to a blessed hashref, making it easy to violate
encapsulation (and this is needed because without public readers/writers, the
instance needs to reach into the hashref to get its data). The syntax is still
a bit clumsy, requiring readers/writers to be declared separately from their
fields.

We actually find [Zydeco](https://metacpan.org/pod/Zydeco) and
[Dios](https://metacpan.org/pod/Dios) interesting, but the scope of those
projects is probably far larger than what could go into the core (and we
haven't reviewed them thoroughly enough to sure they're appropriate).

# 2.12 Open Issues
The astute reader will note that between this and the
[Overview](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Corinna-Overview) (MVP) document,
there are a few things that are not specified. For example, while we have an
[extremely detailed specification for object
construction](https://gist.github.com/Ovid/accb0c7c8444bdd150b5c7509809477f),
we have not defined objects, classes, or methods. Some terms are so common
that repeating definitions everywhere would take months.

Other things, such as the exact nature of the destruction object that
`DESTRUCT` takes, or whether or not `DESTRUCT` is even a phaser. We're torn on
this.

We want the specification to be detailed enough that P5P can make a decision,
but want it to be loose enough that if we need to change some aspects, we
don't want P5P to feel like we've pulled a bait and switch.

So we're hoping to get approval for an iterative, agile approach. With the
great feedback from so many people, we've gotten most of those beaten into a
solid shape and we're comfortable with it, but no matter how careful we are,
we're going to make mistakes and we don't want to go down the waterfall
approach of specifying everything to the nth degree and committing ourselves
to a bad design.

# 2.13 Scope for future work
Corinna v.0.1.0 is intended to be "the simplest thing that can possibly work."
By "possibly work," we mean "is useful enough for a production environment."
However, it the list of things we _could_ add to Corinna is extensive and
should likely be guided by the new RFC process after the initial exposure to
Corinna gives people an idea of how effective OO can be.

There are numerous things we could do in the future.

* Create a native Object type (OV?) instead of using a blessed array reference
  (performance)
* Ability to declare individual classes and methods as `final` (performance.
  See also, [sealed
  lexicals](https://www.sunstarsys.com/essays/perl7-sealed-lexicals))
* Types (focused on correctness and readability, but this is a cross-cutting
  concern)
* Declare Authority (`class Foo authority cpan:OVID { ... }`)
* Nested classes
* Anonymous classes
* Multidispatch
* Etc.

# 2.14 Contributors
The [list of contributors is on the
wiki](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/wiki/Contributors).

# 2.15 Copyright
Copyright (C) 2021, Curtis "Ovid" Poe

This document and code and documentation within it may be used, redistributed
and/or modified under the same terms as Perl itself.


---

Prev: [Table of Contents](toc.md)   
Next: [Grammar](grammar.md)
