Prev: [Questions](questions.md)   
Next: [Changes](major-changes.md)

---

# Section 12: Quotes

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/quotes.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/quotes.md) instead.**

---

# 12.1 Overview
As Corinna has gotten closer to submitting an RFC to P5P, people have been
asking about the people who developed or influenced Corinna. This list is not
exhaustive and changes are to be expected.

Names are in alphabetical order.

## 12.1.1 [Curtis Poe, a.k.a. Ovid](https://metacpan.org/author/OVID/), Perl book author and lead designer of Corinna
> We love Perl, but it's struggling. We know that. Corinna is not
> going to save it. Nor is a better code of conduct. Nor is Perl 7,
> concurrency, types, or \<insert favorite hobby horse here\>. Instead, it's
> all of these things, and many more, with a strong community to support the
> language, that will continue to help Perl thrive. Let's start being the
> people we tell our children to be.

## 12.1.2 [Damian Conway, a.k.a. _That_ Damian](https://metacpan.org/author/DCONWAY), Computer scientist and (too many accolades to list)
> When people ask me whether I support the Corinna proposal, my response is:
> OH, HELL YES! I’ve literally been waiting two decades to see Perl gain a
> proper, built-in, declarative, encapsulated, and performant OO system. And
> this, I firmly believe, is it.

[Read his full statement at blogs.perl.org](http://blogs.perl.org/users/damian_conway/2021/08/a-dream-realized.html).

## 12.1.3 [Dan Book, a.k.a. Grinnz](https://metacpan.org/author/DBOOK), CPAN author and docs wrangler
> Moose and its derivatives provide a comprehensive and popular object
> framework for Perl, but some parts have always been workarounds for the
> limitations of the hash-based object format and existing Perl syntax and
> semantics. Corinna is a methodical reimagination of what a modern built-in
> Perl object framework could look like without those limits, informed by the
> decades of object-oriented applications within and without.

## 12.1.4 [Matt Trout, a.k.a. mst](https://metacpan.org/author/MSTROUT), Creator of Moo
> The Corinna process is highly promising, and I'm very much enjoying the fact
> that almost everybody involved in the design process is a prolific and
> highly experienced Moo/se user and yet we still manage to argue about
> absolutely everything.

## 12.1.5 [Sawyer X, a.k.a. Sawyer X](https://metacpan.org/author/XSAWYERX), former Perl pumpking
> Corinna is a feature-rich, modern OO framework. It has a clean, minimal, yet
> expressive syntax, keeping OO best practices as its defaults. It comes from
> a veteran of OO in general and in Perl in particular (Moo, Moose, and
> everything under the sun before and between those), showing how to design a
> framework that avoids the pitfalls we only discover years into practice. It
> is not a competitor to Moose. It is the next level from it.
>
> Corinna is how Perl should look like and how we should write it. Expressive,
> minimal and exact, clean, and powerful.

## 12.1.6 [Stevan Little, a.k.a. "Damnit, Stevan"](https://metacpan.org/author/STEVAN), creator of Moose
> I am glad Ovid is working on this, better him than me 😛


---

Prev: [Questions](questions.md)   
Next: [Changes](major-changes.md)
