rfc/roles.md, before:

Prev: [Methods](methods.md)   
Next: [Phasers](phasers.md)

---

# Section 8: Roles

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/roles.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/roles.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

# 8.1 Background
Roles in Corinna are based on the [Traits, composable units of
behavior](http://scg.unibe.ch/archive/papers/Scha02bTraits.pdf)
paper, we particularly find interest in [Traits: the formal
model](http://scg.unibe.ch/archive/papers/Scha02cTraitsModel.pdf).

In particular, according to the formal model, traits are designed to be both
commutative (`a+b=b+a`) and associative (`(a+b)+c=a+(b+c)`). While we cannot
perfectly guarantee this in the face of method modifiers, we will see to
return to this model.

# 8.2 Overview
Roles are designed to share small sets of behaviors which address
cross-cutting concerns. Roles may consume other roles, but they may not
inherit from classes, nor may they be inherited from.

Roles may require one or more methods to be implemented. All abstract methods
in roles are considered to be required. For Corinna, any forward declaration
(a method declared without a body: `method foo;`) of a method is considered an
abstract method.

```perl
role SomeRole {
    method foo;
    method bar :common;
    ...
}
```

Any non-private methods with method bodies are considered to be methods the
role provides. These may be both class and instance methods.

*Important* required methods must not be listed with arguments. These are a
syntax errors:

```perl
method foo ();
method bar ($baz);
```

```perl
role SomeRole {
    method foo ()          { ... } # instance method provided
    method bar :common ()  { ... } # class method provided
    method baz :private () { ... } # private methods are not provided
}
```

Any fields declared in the role are completely private unless standard
field attributes are used to expose them

```perl
role SomeRole {
    field $name :reader; # ->name is provided
    field $age;          # private to this role
}
```

Roles may _not_ access the fields or methods of the class the
role is consumed into unless those have already been exposed in the public
interface.

# 8.3 Example
It is entirely possible, for example, to want to have an identical mechanism
to provide unique, repeatable UUIDs to different classes. It might look like
this:

```perl
role Role::UUID {
    use Data::UUID;

    # these are private to this role
    my $uuid           = Data::UUID->new;
    my $namespace_uuid = $uuid->create_str;

    # abtract methods in roles are required
    method name;

    method uuid () {
        return $uuid->create_from_name_str( $namespace_uuid, $self->name );
    }
}
```

And to use that in your class:

```perl
class Person :does(Role::UUID) {
    field $name :param :reader;
}
```

And using that:

```perl
my $alice = Person->new(name => 'Alice');
say $alice->uuid;
```

The above will create a unique, repeatable UUID for a given `Person.name`
(only repeats in a single process due to how UUIDs work).

Roles may consume other roles and classes may consume one or more roles. Any
method name conflicts are fatal, if and only if the methods come from
different namespaces.

```perl
role A :does(C) { method a () { ... } }
role B :does(C) { method b () { ... } }
role C          { method c () { ... } }

class SomeClass :does(A, B)   { ... }
```

Thus, in the above example, though A and B both pull in the `c()` method from
role C, there is no conflict because it is the same method.

However, if `SomeClass` defined a `c()` method, there will be a conflict.

# 8.4 Aliasing and Excluding
For the MVP, we will not be providing aliasing and excluding of methods.

# 8.5 `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT`
Both the `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` [phasers](phasers.md) will be allowed in
roles. Class `ADJUST` phasers are called before its roles `ADJUST` phasers
which are called before child `ADJUST` phasers and its roles phaswers.

`DESTRUCT` role phasers are called before class `DESTRUCT` phasers which are
called before parent `DESTRUCT` phasers.

**Important**: for a given level of the inheritance hierarchy, if more than
one role is consumed, the order in which its `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` phasers
are called is not guaranteed.

# 8.6 Questions
## 8.6.1 Changing access level of role methods?
No role method marked as `private` should be composed into the consuming class
or role. However, the consumer may need the behavior, but not want to expose
it.

If a method exported by a role is public but the consumer does not wish to
expose that part of its interface, should it have a way to adjust the access
level to C<private>?


---

Prev: [Methods](methods.md)   
Next: [Phasers](phasers.md)

Commit message:

Update conflict resolution section in roles.md

rfc/roles.md, after:

Prev: [Methods](methods.md)   
Next: [Phasers](phasers.md)

---

# Section 8: Roles

**This file is automatically generated. If you wish to submit a PR, do not
edit this file directly. Please edit
[templates/rfc/roles.md](https://github.com/Ovid/Cor/tree/master/templates/rfc/roles.md) instead. Use `bin/generate_rfc.pl` to regenerate the RFCs.**

---

# 8.1 Background
Roles in Corinna are based on the [Traits, composable units of
behavior](http://scg.unibe.ch/archive/papers/Scha02bTraits.pdf)
paper, we particularly find interest in [Traits: the formal
model](http://scg.unibe.ch/archive/papers/Scha02cTraitsModel.pdf).

In particular, according to the formal model, traits are designed to be both
commutative (`a+b=b+a`) and associative (`(a+b)+c=a+(b+c)`). While we cannot
perfectly guarantee this in the face of method modifiers, we will see to
return to this model.

# 8.2 Overview
Roles are designed to share small sets of behaviors which address
cross-cutting concerns. Roles may consume other roles, but they may not
inherit from classes, nor may they be inherited from.

Roles may require one or more methods to be implemented. All abstract methods
in roles are considered to be required. For Corinna, any forward declaration
(a method declared without a body: `method foo;`) of a method is considered an
abstract method.

```perl
role SomeRole {
    method foo;
    method bar :common;
    ...
}
```

Any non-private methods with method bodies are considered to be methods the
role provides. These may be both class and instance methods.

*Important* required methods must not be listed with arguments. These are a
syntax errors:

```perl
method foo ();
method bar ($baz);
```

```perl
role SomeRole {
    method foo ()          { ... } # instance method provided
    method bar :common ()  { ... } # class method provided
    method baz :private () { ... } # private methods are not provided
}
```

Any fields declared in the role are completely private unless standard
field attributes are used to expose them

```perl
role SomeRole {
    field $name :reader; # ->name is provided
    field $age;          # private to this role
}
```

Roles may _not_ access the fields or methods of the class the
role is consumed into unless those have already been exposed in the public
interface.

# 8.3 Example
It is entirely possible, for example, to want to have an identical mechanism
to provide unique, repeatable UUIDs to different classes. It might look like
this:

```perl
role Role::UUID {
    use Data::UUID;

    # these are private to this role
    my $uuid           = Data::UUID->new;
    my $namespace_uuid = $uuid->create_str;

    # abtract methods in roles are required
    method name;

    method uuid () {
        return $uuid->create_from_name_str( $namespace_uuid, $self->name );
    }
}
```

And to use that in your class:

```perl
class Person :does(Role::UUID) {
    field $name :param :reader;
}
```

And using that:

```perl
my $alice = Person->new(name => 'Alice');
say $alice->uuid;
```

The above will create a unique, repeatable UUID for a given `Person.name`
(only repeats in a single process due to how UUIDs work).

Roles may consume other roles and classes may consume one or more roles. Any
method name conflicts are fatal, if and only if the methods come from
different namespaces.

```perl
role A :does(C) { method a () { ... } }
role B :does(C) { method b () { ... } }
role C          { method c () { ... } }

class SomeClass :does(A, B)   { ... }
```

Thus, in the above example, though A and B both pull in the `c()` method from
role C, there is no conflict because it is the same method.

However, if `SomeClass` defined a `c()` method, there will be a conflict.

# 8.4 Aliasing and Excluding
For the MVP, we will not be providing aliasing and excluding of methods.

# 8.5 `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT`
Both the `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` [phasers](phasers.md) will be allowed in
roles. Class `ADJUST` phasers are called before its roles `ADJUST` phasers
which are called before child `ADJUST` phasers and its roles phaswers.

`DESTRUCT` role phasers are called before class `DESTRUCT` phasers which are
called before parent `DESTRUCT` phasers.

**Important**: for a given level of the inheritance hierarchy, if more than
one role is consumed, the order in which its `ADJUST` and `DESTRUCT` phasers
are called is not guaranteed.

# 8.6 Conflicts
Consuming multiple roles may result in method name conflicts. This is a fatal
error. If a class consumes a role with a method name that conflicts with a
role method, the class method wins, but a warning is issued.

# 8.7 Questions
## 8.7.1 Changing access level of role methods?
No role method marked as `private` should be composed into the consuming class
or role. However, the consumer may need the behavior, but not want to expose
it.

If a method exported by a role is public but the consumer does not wish to
expose that part of its interface, should it have a way to adjust the access
level to C<private>?


---

Prev: [Methods](methods.md)   
Next: [Phasers](phasers.md)
